Recently, an individual I’ll call Troy sent
me a message saying he feels like
he’s stuck between atheism and theism.
He identifies as an atheist
but continues to lapse back into theism.
These lapses are prompted by accidents
like denting his car or twisting his ankle.
He experiences a strong guilt response, believing he’s being punished by a supreme being
and finds himself reciting prayers.
Lately, he’s started to feel like he’ll never shake the idea
that he’s being watched and judged
as defective by a supreme being.
I relayed Troy’s story to my patrons
and asked if any of them experienced similar episodes.
In a straw poll, 20 out of 70 individuals
registered that they did experience temporary lapses.
Several folks registered that the concept
of lapses didn’t apply to them
because they’d always been atheists.
Some folks said they used to have lapses,
but they didn’t last.
Some described more fleeting experiences
of detached reflection that had no big emotional impact.
Some said they had lapses,
but in response to other stimuli
like coincidences, choral music or when they find themselves in a group practicing communal prayer.
But for others, their episodes — like Troy’s —
were about anticipating punishment and judgement.
I want to drill down into this notion of an
all-knowing, all-powerful, omnipresent judge
and look at why, if it existed
this so-called ‘supreme being’ should
be apologising rather than judging.
This is not going to be a list of divinely
perpetrated atrocities cited in religious scriptures
— tales of divinely sanctioned
subjugation, persecution, genocidal bloodbaths.
That list is long and the atrocities are as
callous and sadistic as it gets.
But you don’t have to subscribe to any specific
religion to find this hypothetical judge guilty.
The charges go deeper than scripture, to the essential
nature of the judge
and the theological foundations of the concept of ‘evil’.
But first, I want to say something about these
persistent anxieties some folks feel
about being punished and judged
by some all-seeing presence.
In my psychological work, I’ve spoken with men
and women involved in abusive relationships
and it didn’t take long to spot theistic echoes.
In a session with one of my very first clients
a man I’ll call Ben who presented with depression
I was struck by the sense that the partner
he’d been describing didn’t sound human.
She sounded like some omnipresent entity,
seeping into every moment of his life
scrutinising his every move, anticipating every thought — and wielding the power of ultimate judgement over him.
I shared this with Ben and commented that it was as if he was talking about a god rather than a human being.
After a cavernous silence, gazing up at the ceiling
he wryly remarked that
he’d swapped one tyrant for another.
At first I wondered if he was referring to
a previous relationship.
He explained he was talking about a god
and spoke about the struggle he’d had extracting himself from the religion he’d been indoctrinated into as a child.
As we compared these divine and human dictators
and how both of them had taken a hold of him,
some parallels emerged.
Both of these abusive regimes had substantially
diminished Ben’s capacity for independent thinking
by conditioning a range of reflex
responses into him.
When Ben first encountered unreasonable ideas and behaviour — in both his religion and his relationship —
there was an explosion of thinking on his part.
His brain went into problem-solving mode
as he tried to figure out what was going on
and how to respond.
He tried various strategies — using logic and reason, appealing to fairness, offering compromises —
gradually giving away more ground. But
authoritarian regimes aren’t big on compromise
and, in both his religion
and his relationship
the conflict only ended when
Ben admitted he was wrong.
The next time he encountered
unreasonable ideas and behaviour
he again tried to think through a considered response
but put up less of a defence
before admitting he was wrong.
He said it was like a hole opening up behind him that became easier to fall into each time.
Soon he’d learned to admit he was wrong immediately, with no intervening period of thought.
This unthinking response to a stimulus
is known as a reflex.
And abusers can build up a range
of these reflexes in their target,
so eventually the target can be played like a puppet,
twitching mechanically to various cues.
When targets begin to see these reflex responses
they can begin to reintroduce
the missing element of conscious thought.
For instance, targets who realise
they always robotically obey certain orders
like getting their partner a beer
can begin to think about this reflex response and
to consider and implement different outcomes.
In many cases, the ultimate outcome
will be a parting of the ways.
When targets of abuse start thinking for themselves
and rebuilding their eroded sense of worth
impossible ideas can become possible,
including the idea of leaving.
People recovering from abusive religious,
pseudoscientific and socio-political ideologies
that’ve instilled a range of reflex responses in them
— reflex compliance, reflex guilt, reflex fear —
sometimes have to do similar work
to reintroduce the conscious thought
that’s been conditioned out of them.
Something else that can aid recovery is taking
a good long critical look at the abuser.
Ben noted that, in relation
to both his partner and his religion
he became so consumingly preoccupied trying to meet the superhuman standards they set for him
and feeling anxious and fearful when he failed to do so
that he didn’t stop to consider how well
they matched up to those standards themselves.
When we turn the spotlight on abusers
we repeatedly find not only that they come
nowhere near the standards they set for others
but that they operate on
a completely different set of rules
one that shields them from all the hardships
their targets were expected to endure.
We have no control over the circumstances of our birth.
Throughout history, we humans’ve found ourselves
randomly born on parts of the Earth’s land mass
where a substantial percentage of the population
has happened to follow a particular religion.
Many of us will’ve found ourselves being
labelled members of that religion from birth
and taught to accept its mythology uncritically as truth.
We’ll often be taught that the purpose of
our life is to serve one or more
of thousands of mythical beings
proposed by humans over the centuries
and made to attend regular worship services
in religious temples dedicated to these entities.
In some cases, the entity concerned
will be conceptualised
as a single all-knowing, all-powerful,
omnipresent creator.
But this nebulous concept
is difficult for little minds to grasp.
To make it seem more personal and relatable
some religions humanise it
by claiming that we were created in its image
implying that we share significant characteristics with it.
This personification might be underscored
with anthropomorphic language.
The creator might be pictured walking around a garden or enjoying the aroma of animal sacrifices
which would seem to require legs
and a nose of some description.
There might be references
to friendly face-to-face conversations.
Other more obscure parts of its anatomy might
be mentioned, like its back side.
Well, thrones are built for arses,and various
religions —including all the Abrahamic ones —
speak of a divine ceremonial chair.
Polytheistic deities can be humanised
by adding family members.
Ancient Greek religion was
overrun with divine siblings and offspring,
including a slew of demigods — products of numerous dalliances between the gods and the mortals.
The concept of family might seem
off-limits to monotheistic religions.
But Christianity famously manages to have it both ways.
Or more accurately, three ways.
In Christian mythology, the creator Yahweh had a son
— the Christian messiah Jesus —
who, according to a Christian prayer called the Gloria, sits at his father’s right hand.
Presumably, space is reserved
at Yahweh’s left hand for the holy spirit
which, after Yahweh and Jesus, forms the third prong
of what Christians call ‘the Holy Trinity’
a mathematics-defying celestial equation in which
one plus one plus one equals one.
All this humanising language and
physical imagery can go a long way
towards making the cloudy concept of an all-knowing,
all-powerful, omnipresent creator
feel concrete, relatable, accessible, personal.
In particular, using intimate forms of address like ‘Father’
can make it so easy for children and adults
to project onto that cloudy concept all their
fantasies of a supreme parent
arousing all the infantilising feelings
associated with those fantasies.
Feelings of implicit trust, loyalty, deference and respect.
But none of this humanising language
and imagery holds up.
And when we begin to get to grips
with just how utterly inhuman this god concept is
it becomes clear that if this alien
character had created us
it would have more to answer for than any human.
The phrase ‘created in its image’
has various interpretations.
It’s been said to refer to ‘physical image’,
‘emotional image’, ’moral image’, ‘intellectual image’
and, maybe most obscure of all, ‘relational image’.
Even allowing the progressively
swollen poetic licence behind these interpretations
all of them fail.
But they do provide a handy framework tor presenting the charges against this divine judge.
The idea that our bodies bear any physical resemblance to an all-knowing, all-powerful,omnipresent creator
is one relatively few folks seem
keen to defend these days.
As our knowledge of biology and physics has increased
we’ve come to appreciate that
the physical form of a being
is intimately connected to the specific
environmental conditions it inhabits.
Wings come in many shapes and sizes.
But we’ve learned those shapes and sizes are constrained by factors like drag, thrust, lift and weight.
And we’ve realised that
some of the mythical winged characters
humans’ve dreamed up over the centuries
from Icarus with his wings of feathers and wax
to the Biblical six-winged seraphim
would simply never get off the ground.
Likewise, we now appreciate the absurdity
of a vast naturally humanoid god
possessing depth-perceiving forward-facing eyes
with nothing external to see
stereo-perceiving ears with nothing external to hear
agile limbs with no external space
through which to move —and so on.
The most common view I’ve encountered
from folks proposing a mythical creator
is that it has no physical form at all.
So why do we?
Expanding on those four words
why do we have a physical form
that can be damaged or destroyed
by other humans, predators, microbes, poisonous materials and natural disasters
that frequently attacks itself
with debilitating and deadly cancers
and that quickly perishes without
adequate food, water or oxygen
or if its core temperature falls or rises
by just a few degrees Fahrenheit.
A form that — if it survives these hazards —
can look forward to incapacitation
and decay before its inevitable death.
Why are we subjected to these sufferings
by a creator that’s immune to them?
When I was a Christian
I was told human suffering was a result of being endowed with the most precious gift from Yahweh.
The gift of free choice.
The reasoning went like this:
Yahweh created us with free choice to do bad or good.
That meant people had to be allowed to do bad things
even if they ended up hurting
— or even killing — countless others.
Preventing them from doing bad things
would take away their free choice.
In effect, they would be forced
to be good against their will.
So Yahweh couldn't interfere either by restraining an abuser or protecting the abuser’s target.
The meagre consolation offered to us
was that all abuse would eventually be punished.
In regard to the other hardships we endured
—diseases, predators, natural disasters —
these were all presented as extensions
of the same principle.
The first humans had been given a paradise to live in.
But because they disobeyed their creator
they were expelled to the world we now live in,
with all of its dangers.
So even these forms of suffering were
ultimately down to human free choice.
When I was a Christian, I found this
reasoning persuasive for a time.
It didn’t stop me resenting the suffering
we had to endure
but I could appreciate that the alternative of forcing everyone to be good was also extremely undesirable.
In fact, the lack of freedom entailed by forcing people
to be good could itself be seen as a form of suffering.
Given the option of free choice plus suffering
or no free choice plus no suffering
I could see the appeal of option one.
I later realised I’d fallen for a false
dichotomy
the presentation of two alternatives as the only alternatives, when in fact others exist.
The clue that this was a false dichotomy was
staring me in the face —albeit, in a non-physical way.
It was Yahweh.
And this demonstrates another parallel
with human abusive relationships
in that we spend so much time
absolutely focussed on these dictators
and yet not seeing them at all.
Here, supposedly, was a being that enjoyed total free choice with full knowledge of good and evil
but experienced no suffering.
It was impossible to harm this being.
To do so would be to diminish its greatness
in some way, violating its divine incorruptibility.
So free choice and suffering weren’t inevitably paired.
You didn’t have to either accept both
or reject both —not if you were incorruptible.
So why weren’t we created in this incorruptible image?
Why are we down here in these bizarre, fragile bodies
being infected, beaten, starved,
raped, tortured and murdered
while this supposed creator enjoys
an existence devoid of suffering?
It’s been put to me that the creator
couldn’t create beings like itself.
One reason offered is that its creation
might then overpower it.
First, how could it overpower its creator?
They would be like two perfect chess players
able to anticipate every one of their opponent’s moves.
The only possible outcome is stalemate.
Second, wouldn’t a desire to overpower its
creator indicate some deficiency?
If the creation was a copy of the creator, this deficiency would have to exist in the original.
If you’re arguing that a copy
of the creator could go rogue
you’re arguing that the original could go rogue.
A Christian undergrad student I once knew
suggested that a god-like creation
might abuse its power in other ways
for example by creating less powerful beings
and subjecting them to torture.
She didn’t realise she was describing her own god.
We have to look at things from the perspective
of an all-knowing, all-powerful creator.
Vulnerability, hardship, abuse, pain, distress, fear
— it has no experience of these things.
It would have to design beings utterly unlike itself
in order for them to be capable of experiencing suffering.
In designing those beings, it would bring these previously non-existent phenomena into existence.
The theological implications are clear.
It created suffering.
It created torment.
It created sickness.
Some claim we were made
in the ‘emotional image’ of a creator.
It can have a profoundly humanising effect when
we imagine we were created by a being
that experiences all the feelings we do.
But the emotional landscape
we experience becomes incoherent
when applied to an all-knowing, all-powerful creator.
Just like wings, emotions only make
sense under certain conditions.
We use emotions in dealing with our lack
of control and our lack of foreknowledge.
To a creator that has total control and total knowledge, the human emotional landscape is meaningless.
This creator can’t feel fear.
Fear is a response to real or perceived threat.
An all-powerful being experiences neither of these.
It can’t feel disappointment.
Disappointment is a response to
the non-fulfilment of hopes and expectations.
An all-knowing being doesn’t hope — it knows —
and its expectations are never wrong.
Does it feel anger? Religious scriptures
are full of scenes of divine rage.
But the characters they describe have the same stagy feel as the Great Oz
from Lyman Frank Baum’s Wizard of Oz
whose overblown theatrics are
designed to impress and intimidate.
In fact, these scriptural tantrums
make no sense whatsoever.
Anger is a response to provocation.
While human dictators are often easily provoked because of their flaccid egos
a truly all-powerful being would have no such weakness.
Anger’s also a response to things not going our way.
An all-knowing, all-powerful being knows
every outcome before it sets any plan in motion.
Everything goes its way.
Does it feel sorrow? Sorrow is a response
to regret and misfortune.
Both of these indicate a desire that things had happened differently.
Such notions are incompatible
with an all-knowing, all-powerful being
whose plans could not be improved on.
Which brings us to an emotion that this creator
should feel — in abundance. Guilt.
A response to the sense we’ve done wrong,
specifically that we’ve caused harm.
An all-knowing being would be aware of all the unnecessary harm it’s brought into existence
by creating us with such excessive
capacity for suffering.
But guilt is the one divine emotion we never hear about.
Some claim we were created in the ‘moral image’
of an all-knowing, all-powerful, omnipresent creator.
Again, this only draws attention to our polar differences.
Morality is intrinsically grounded in knowledge.
It’s only through a comprehensive knowledge of relevant factors that sound moral decisions  can be made.
An all-knowing creator would have that knowledge.
We don’t.
And that puts our moral images worlds apart.
Aside from making us instantly vulnerable to deception
— something to which an all-knowing
creator is impervious —
our lack of knowledge makes us
vulnerable to all kinds of errors.
We still misinterpret harmless
human variation as sick and sinful
leading us to pathologise and punish
countless healthy, innocent people.
We misinterpret sickness as divine curses,
leading us to abuse the ill.
We misinterpret sickness as divine blessing.
In Jeanette Winterson’s brilliant autobiographical novel ‘Oranges are not the only fruit’
she describes a period
in her childhood when she became deaf
and her Pentecostal evangelist mother
— who yearned for the apocalypse and whose favourite song was ‘God has blotted them out’ —
declared her daughter to be in a state of rapture.
Thanks to external intervention, Jeanette was taken
to hospital for a vital operation.
Because of our lack of knowledge,
we twist the very concept of harm.
Some of us cry harm when others point out the flaws
in our ideas,  or merely express disagreement.
Valid criticism is twisted into an immoral,
harmful act on a par with physical harm
merely because we don’t like
having our fallacious ideas challenged.
On the flipside, actual physically harm
gets twisted into therapy.
Savage, gratuitous beatings are reframed
as ‘tough love’ and ‘moral guidance’
—a sadism justified with
the false analogy of unpleasant medicine
that’s horrible to take but makes us better.
Without the essential ingredient of knowledge
we label all kinds of bad ‘good’,
and all kinds of good ‘bad’.
Maybe most ironic of all, because of our lack of knowledge
there are times when we want to help
but simply don’t know how.
It could be anything from wanting to cure a disease
to wanting to rescue someone who’s been
recruited by a harmful group.
Here, the urge to help is palpably there
but our lack of knowledge holds us back.
Here, we are the reverse image of a creator
that knows the cure to every sickness and the solution
to every problem — but declines to help.
Some folks claim that, as reasoning, logical beings,
we reflect the ‘intellectual image’ of a creator.
But this creator has no use for reason or logic.
We use reason and logic to lever our way out
of ignorance and uncertainty into knowledge.
We use logical syllogisms to work out that
if idea one is true and idea two is true
then logically idea three must be true.
An all-knowing creator already knows
if idea three is true
without having to work through any logical process.
It also knows when either of the first two
ideas are false
— something we often fail to recognise,
leading to unsound conclusions.
An all-knowing creator is immune to the scores
of logical fallacies to which we’re vulnerable.
There’s an appealing irony in the fact that,
if this creator existed
it would be listening in on all the fallacious arguments some people make for its existence
like appeals to ignorance,
where a god is presented as true
just because the individual
can’t imagine any alternative.
An all-knowing creator never has to learn.
Learning and reliance on an imperfect memory
are burdens exclusive to its creation.
And let’s not forget the burden of faith,
which requires the suspension of our critical faculties
further diminishing our already severely diminished intellectual capacity in the service of religious beliefs.
An all-knowing being is incapable of faith.
It will never have to believe something
for which it has no evidence.
And it will never experience the dissonance that results
from finding out its faith was misplaced.
In Josh and Sean McDowell’s
‘Bible Handbook of Difficult Verses’
when addressing the difficult verse in Genesis that speaks of  the Christian creator making us in its image
the authors skip every other kind of image so far mentioned and go straight for ‘relational image’.
They claim we inherited from their god
‘the ability to communicate our thoughts,
intents and feelings to others’
and cite the repeated scriptural phrase ‘God said’
as evidence that relationships mean
communication to others.
But what kind of communication?
One of my first teachers was always complaining:
‘You can’t talk to a book!’
She was expressing her frustration as a reader
at being unable to ask authors about their intended meaning.
Change one word and we have the problem with
divine communication: ‘You can’t talk to a god’.
The being claimed by some
to be the most important in the universe
with the most important message for humanity
doesn’t take questions.
Instead, it’s claimed to use two of the most
error-prone kinds of communication possible.
The first is scripture, open to multiple
conflicting interpretations
with no way of verifying which ones are valid.
The second consists of signs
in the form of arbitrary life events
including coincidences and odd physical sensations.
Here, the recipient first has to somehow determine
that the sign is a sign rather than just a random event.
The recipient then has to determine
its meaning,again with no divine verification.
It’s a recipe for chaos.
And chaos is exactly what we see
with religious groups clashing,often violently,
over competing interpretations.
Thankfully, human communication doesn’t follow
this inferior one-way relational image.
Our relational image goes both ways
employing the revolutionary concept of dialogue.
This allows us to check with each other
for errors in our understanding.
It also allows cooperation and negotiation
— two more concepts conspicuously
lacking in the creator’s image.
The McDowells also claim that taking care
of the poor and defending human rights
find their basis in each of us because we were
purposely created in their god’s relational image
— with value, dignity, and worth.
But if we had been made in the relational
image of this supposed god
we’d show no compassion and offer no help.
We’d stand by, watching
and doing nothing, just as it does
passively permitting every kind of suffering.
We might try to shield ourselves
from harm in an ultimately vain attempt
to emulate a creator that’s
conveniently shielded from all harm.
But there’d be no taking care of the poor,
and no defending of human rights.
The reason we support and fight for others is because we’re not made in this creator’s relational image.
The concepts of competition and worship are also absent from the creator’s relational image.
Meanwhile we’re forced to compete
for limited resources just to survive
and we’re threatened and deceived
into worshipping false icons.
The more we try to pin down what it might mean
to be created in the image
of an all-knowing, all-powerful being
the more fundamental differences
we expose on every level
— physical, emotional, moral, intellectual and relational.
All of these fundamental differences reflect burdens
we endure that this mythical creator does not
— even the positive ones.
If we were all-knowing, we’d have no need for dialogue.
If we didn’t suffer, compassion would be redundant.
As creators ourselves, we constantly model
our creations on our own image
from service robots to video game characters
to remotely operated avatar androids
like the Telenoid, created by Japanese roboticist
Hiroshi Ishiguro, endowed with arms for giving hugs.
We’re drawn to interact with human-like creations
— it’s what we understand.
But, as we begin to explore the possibilities
of creating actual artificial life
artificial consciousness, artificial intelligence
should we instead follow the example
of our mythical creator
and make our creations completely unlike us?
Should we impose new forms of suffering on them?
Dream up new kinds of vulnerability?
Should we introduce them to a range
of environmental hazards unknown to us?
Should we invent a collection of distressing emotions for them that we were incapable of experiencing?
And should we threaten terrible punishments if,
after all this, they declined to worship us?
If you’re feeling squeamish
about any of these suggestions
you’re showing how different you are
from a hypothetical all-knowing, all-powerful creator
who’s willing to do all of the above.
Wanting worse for others than for yourself
is no indication of greatness.
On the subject of artificial life ....
In Isaac Asimov’s short story ‘Runaround’
engineers Mike Donovan and Gregory Powell
travel to Mercury with a robot called Speedy
to restart a mining station.
Finding that the life-support system is running low on
selenium
Powell and Donovan send Speedy out
to a selenium pool a few miles away to obtain some.
Hours later Speedy hasn’t returned, despite the fact
he hasn’t stopped running the whole time.
In ‘Runaround’, Asimov introduces
his famous three laws of robotics
three laws embedded in the programming of all robots
designed to maximise safety for humans and robots.
Law one: a robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.
Law two: a robot must obey the orders
given it by human beings
except where such orders would conflict
with the First Law.
Law three: a robot must protect its own existence
as long as such protection does not conflict
with the first or second Laws.
Eventually, the engineers venture out onto
the boiling Mercury landscape in search of Speedy
and find him running in circles
by the selenium pool.
It doesn’t take them long to figure out what’s happened.
Speedy’s become caught
between law two and law three.
There are unexpected corrosive gases around the pool.
This activates law three which directs Speedy to protect his own existence and run away from the pool.
But when he’s far enough from the pool,
the danger subsides and law two kicks in,
directing Speedy to obey his order to collect selenium.
So Speedy runs back to the pool.
He’s stuck in an endless loop
—one that will soon have life-or-death
consequences for Donovan and Powell.
Later on, Speedy’s depicted offering endless
apologies and feeling scared about being judged.
But he’s told that it wasn’t his fault — he wasn’t responsible for his flawed programming.
Just like Speedy, we appear to come
hardwired with deeply flawed programming
that obstructs our ability to process reality
— with substantial consequences for us
and those we interact with.
One of many intriguing and unsettling lines
of research in this area
concerns the human tendency
to infer personality traits from faces.
Absurd as it seems, based solely on
the physical structure of people’s faces
we instinctively score them on
a range of psychological characteristics
— including likeability, trustworthiness,
competence and aggressiveness.
And we make these judgements within
as little as 100 milliseconds.
This has huge implications
for human relationships of every stripe
from choice of life partners
to the political direction of nations.
Research by Todorov and his colleagues
suggests that inferences of competence that
occurred within a one-second exposure
to the faces of electoral candidates
could predict the outcomes of elections.
Short of having clones run for each political party
it’s not clear how this kind of facial
prejudice could be cancelled.
Todorov has commented:
‘We decide very quickly whether a person
possesses many of the traits we feel are important
such as likeability and competence, even though
we have not exchanged a single word with them.
It appears we are hard-wired to draw these
inferences in a fast, unreflective way.’
His research with Engell and Haxby
using functional magnetic resonance imaging
suggests that the amygdala
automatically codes faces
according to features associated
with untrustworthiness.
And this is just one example
of a hardwired human bias.
Psychologists have identified dozens of biases
—involving memory, visual recognition, decision-making and social perception and behaviour —
all operating outside of our awareness,
and therefore outside our conscious control
all actively distorting the way we process reality
introducing errors that directly contribute
to delusions and injustices of every scale.
It’s only through our own meticulous study that we’ve learned about these hidden psychological glitches.
And it’s only through learning about them
that we’ve begun to be able to look out for them
and to try and compensate for the errors they produce.
So. In theological terms, who’s to blame
for this flawed programming?
We’re not talking about random cases of birth defects that might be put down to environment accidents.
We’re talking about errors resulting
from normal brain function.
In Asimov’s ‘Runaround’, Speedy’s creators step forward
and acknowledge responsibility
for his flawed programming,
reassuring him he’s not to blame.
If we were designed by some creator,
shouldn’t it step forward and do same?
Instead, we’re left in the same guilt-ridden, apologetic state Speedy was in before his creators’ reassurances
— anxious about being judged as defective
by a creator that, if it existed, would be
directly responsible for those defects.
Many of us — including myself — have spent a number of years looking up to some imaginary divine dictator
in awe of its greatness.
The very phrase ‘God is great’ has become
a mantra for some religious groups.
But being great isn’t an absolute property,
no more than being large or being fast.
It’s a relative property.
The word ‘great’ indicates that something
is substantially above average.
If this mythical creator had created beings in its own image
it would be considered entirely
unexceptional by its creation.
In theological terms, the greatness
and power of this mythical creator
rests purely on its decision to make its creation
so small and powerless relative to itself.
What do we think about those who have
to diminish others in order to feel great?
Like recovering from domestic abuse,
recovering from religion can take time.
Even when we’ve realised on a rational level that we have no reason whatsoever to believe in any gods
our imaginations sometimes take a while to catch up.
We sometimes have to contend with
persistent negative thoughts
deliberately encouraged by our indoctrinators, designed
to make us feel bad, defective, small, miserable.
One of those images is that of a mythical judge,
meting out sentences and punishments from its bench.
But if it existed, this judge would have
no place sitting on the bench.
Its place would be in the dock
on a charge so wicked that no earthly criminal
could hope to come near it.
The charge of creating sickness.